docs/source/usage.rst, before:

Usage
=====

Overview
--------

The Gene Normalizer provides three different search modes:

* **search**: for each :ref:`source <sources>`, find the record or records that best match the given search string.
* **normalize**: find the normalized concept that best matches the given search string. Return a merged record that incorporates data from all associated records from each source. See :ref:`build_normalization` for more information.
* **normalize_unmerged**: return each source record associated with the normalized concept that best matches the given search string.

REST endpoints
--------------

Once :ref:`HTTP service is activated<starting-service>`, OpenAPI documentation for the REST endpoints is available under the ``/genes`` path (e.g., with default service parameters, at ``http://localhost:8000/genes``), describing endpoint parameters and response objects, and providing some minimal example queries. A live instance is available at `https://normalize.cancervariants.org/gene <https://normalize.cancervariants.org/gene>`_.

The individual endpoints are:

* ``/genes/search``
* ``/genes/normalize``
* ``/genes/normalize_unmerged``

Internal Python API
-------------------

Each search mode can be accessed directly within Python using the :ref:`query API<query-api>`:

.. code-block:: pycon

    >>> from gene.database import create_db
    >>> from gene.query import QueryHandler
    >>> q = QueryHandler(create_db())
    >>> normalized_response = q.normalize('HER2')
    >>> normalized_response
    >>> normalized_response.match_type
    <MatchType.ALIAS: 60>
    >>> normalized_response.gene_descriptor.label
    'ERBB2'

Match types
-----------

The **best match** for a search string is determined by which fields in a gene record that it matches against. The Gene Normalizer will first try to match a search string against known concept IDs and gene symbols, then check for matches against previous or deprecated symbols, then aliases, etc. Matches are case-insensitive but must otherwise be exact.

.. autoclass:: gene.schemas.MatchType
    :members:
    :undoc-members:
    :show-inheritance:

.. note::

    The `FUZZY_MATCH` Match Type is not currently used by the Gene Normalizer.

Commit message:

docs: add more usage details

docs/source/usage.rst, after:

Usage
=====

Overview
--------

The Gene Normalizer provides three different search modes:

* **search**: for each :ref:`source <sources>`, find the record or records that best match the given search string.
* **normalize**: find the normalized concept that best matches the given search string. Return a merged record that incorporates data from all associated records from each source. See :ref:`build_normalization` for more information.
* **normalize_unmerged**: return each source record associated with the normalized concept that best matches the given search string.

REST endpoints
--------------

Once :ref:`HTTP service is activated<starting-service>`, OpenAPI documentation for the REST endpoints is available under the ``/genes`` path (e.g., with default service parameters, at ``http://localhost:8000/genes``), describing endpoint parameters and response objects, and providing some minimal example queries. A live instance is available at `https://normalize.cancervariants.org/gene <https://normalize.cancervariants.org/gene>`_.

The individual endpoints are:

* ``/genes/search``
* ``/genes/normalize``
* ``/genes/normalize_unmerged``

Internal Python API
-------------------

Each search mode can be accessed directly within Python using the :ref:`query API<query-api>`:

.. code-block:: pycon

    >>> from gene.database import create_db
    >>> from gene.query import QueryHandler
    >>> q = QueryHandler(create_db())
    >>> normalized_response = q.normalize('HER2')
    >>> normalized_response
    >>> normalized_response.match_type
    <MatchType.ALIAS: 60>
    >>> normalized_response.gene_descriptor.label
    'ERBB2'

Critically, the ``QueryHandler`` class must receive a database interface instance as its first argument. The most straightforward way to construct a database instance, as demonstrated above, is with the ``create_db`` method provided in the :py:mod:`gene.database` module. This method tries to build a database connection based on a number of conditions, which are resolved in the following order:

1) if environment variable ``GENE_NORM_ENV`` is set to a value, or if the ``aws_instance`` method argument is True, try to create a cloud DynamoDB connection
2) if the ``db_url`` method argument is given a non-None value, try to create a DB connection to that address (if it looks like a PostgreSQL URL, create a PostgreSQL connection, but otherwise try DynamoDB)
3) if the ``GENE_NORM_DB_URL`` environment variable is set, try to create a DB connection to that address (if it looks like a PostgreSQL URL, create a PostgreSQL connection, but otherwise try DynamoDB)
4) otherwise, attempt a DynamoDB connection to the default URL, ``http://localhost:8001``

Users hoping for a more explicit connection declaration may instead call a database class directly, e.g.:

.. code-block:: python

    from gene.database.postgresql import PostgresDatabase
    from gene.query import QueryHandler
    pg_db = PostgresDatabase(
        user="postgres",
        password="hunter2",
        db_name="gene_normalizer"
    )
    q = QueryHandler(pg_db)

See the API documentation for the :ref:`database <database_api>`, :ref:`DynamoDB <dynamodb_api>`, and :ref:`PostgreSQL <postgres_api>` modules for more details.

Match types
-----------

The **best match** for a search string is determined by which fields in a gene record that it matches against. The Gene Normalizer will first try to match a search string against known concept IDs and gene symbols, then check for matches against previous or deprecated symbols, then aliases, etc. Matches are case-insensitive but must otherwise be exact.

.. autoclass:: gene.schemas.MatchType
    :members:
    :undoc-members:
    :show-inheritance:

.. note::

    The `FUZZY_MATCH` Match Type is not currently used by the Gene Normalizer.
